Containers are completely isolated environments, they can have their own process and
services, their own networking interfaces, their own mounts, they are just like a VM except
that they all share the same OS kernal.

Docker utilizer LXC containers, ??? todo: study other types

Google Process level changes - containers/dockers are based on these
1- namespaces (a process running in a namespace can not meddle resources of another process in another namespace)
2- c group (capacity assigned to a group, RAM assigned categorically)

How to get started?
Go to docks.docker.com and click on Get Docker, select your OS and follow the procedure on
the manual
Go to "Install using the convenience script" and enter the following cmds in your terminal
curl -fsSL https://get.docker.com -o get-docker.sh
$ sudo sh get-docker.sh
to check docker version: sudo docker version
to run without root user:
sudo usermod -aG docker elmo
sudo chmod 666 /var/run/docker.sock

Important cmds:
run: runs an instance of a docker image
run -d: runs in detached mode
run -i: interactive mode
run -it: interactive, attaches terminal also
run -p: maps port from docker host to docker container
run -v: maps directory from docker host to docker container
run -e: set an environment variable
run --name: gives name to container
run --entrypoint: overrides the ENTRYPOINT in Dockerfile
run --link: links current image to a docker image it depends on, e:g redis:redis container:host_name
run --cpus=.5: does not allow container to use more than 50% of host system cpus
run --memory=100m: does not allow conatiner to sue mre than 100mb of RAM

attach: re attaches console to detached container
ps: lists all running containers
ps -a: included stopped and exited containers also
stop: stop container, must provide name or id
rm: remove a stopped or exited container
images: available images and sizes
rmi: remove an image, must ensure all contnainer instances running this image are removed before
pull: only pull image but not run the instance
exec: run a command on a running container
inspect: inspects a container
logs: see the console output of a detached container run in background
history: see the cmds executed on an image
build: build a docker image using the Dockerfile
tag: give a new name to an existing image

docker -H=remote-docker-engine:2375 #used when docker cli is not on same machine as Docker Daemon and Docker Rest API

containerizing an app:
FROM os
RUN some-command
ADD: ??? I think also makes a copy
COPY from-source to-docker-path
EXPOSE some-port
ENV set environment variables
WORKDIR some-dir
ENTRYPOINT the command to enter after docker is created, arguments are appended to this
CMD default command to run, if there's an argument this is totally replaced

docker compose:
used to pakcage an application stack using multiple docker containers
docker compose up

DOcker engine is composed of:
  1. Docker CLI: to perfom action on docker objects using the Daemon via Rest API
  2. Rest API: programs can use to comunicate to Daemon and provide instructions
  3. Docker Daemon: backgroud process that manages images, containers, volumes, and networks

Storage:
docker stores everything at /var/lib/docker
it has aufs, containers, image, volumes

docker info | more; docker engine overview

to create a volume:
docker volume create data_volume

volume mount vs bind mount !!!

instead of -v we can also use --mount which is more verbose
example:
    docker run --mount type=bind,source=/data/mysql,target=/var/lib/mysql mysql

docker system df: shows the actualy disc usage by docker
docker system df -v: shows with image/container/volume wise break down of disc usage

Networks:
by default each container is connected to the "bridge" network. which allows containers
to communicate to each other. but anyone outside the docker host can not access this
network unless it is mapped using the -p option.
you can specify the network using the --network command. i-e, docker run Ubuntu --network=host
we can also specify network to be equal to "none"
using the "host" network, docker containers use the same network as the Docker host and
all network isolation for the docker container is lost this way

user defined networks:
by default docker only creates one internal bridged network. We can, however, create multiple.

docker network create --driver bridge subnet 182.18.0.0/16 custom-isolated-network
docker network ls: list all networks
docker network inspect bridge

example:
Create a new network named wp-mysql-network using the bridge driver. Allocate subnet 182.18.0.1/24. Configure Gateway 182.18.0.1
docker network create --driver bridge --subnet 182.18.0.1/24 --gateway 182.18.0.1 wp-mysql-network


DOCKER ON WINDOWS:

1. Docker Toolbox


2. Docker for Windows



Docker SWARM
-------------

Running all your images on a single docker host may not be a good idea for production
environment as we have a single point of failure. Docker Swarm comes in here to resolve
the problem.

With Docker swarm you can combine multiple docker hosts into a single cluster.

It distributes your services into multiple docker hosts for high availability,

Not just high availability, it also help balance the load acros the cluster of Docker hosts,
systems, and hardware.


How to set up?
First you should have multiple dockers hosts installed on multiple machines.
Then you have to designate one of the node to be master or Swarm Manager of the cluster
and others as slave workers.
Once done, run the docker swarm init command on the swarm manager. It will also show the
command - docker swarm join ... - to be run on the worker nodes. Copy and run on each worker
node.
Now you are ready!

Docker Managers
Master nodes are the ones where the swarm is initiated.
Manages workers
Load balancing

Having a single manager node is not recommended !!! single point of failure
you can have multiple managers.  Conflict of interest !!! Only one manager is allowed to 
make management decisions. this node is called the leader. the leader can not always make a
decision on its own. all decisions have to be mutually agreed by the majority or all the
manager nodes. say a leader makes a decison and fails before informing other managers, the
cluster will be in an inconsistent state. for example, the leader decides to add a new node
but fails to notify other and fails; the fututre cluster operations will ignore the new ndoe.
This is known as distributed consensus. Docker solves by implementing the RAFT consensus
algorithm. It helps decide the manager if it has enough votes to make a decision and that
other manager nodes are in sync with the leader.

RAFT uses random timers for initiating requests. for example a random timer is initiated in 3
manager nodes. the first one to finish the timer, sends a request to other managers to be
the leader. Other managers respond with their votes. Now that the leader is elected, it sends
out the notification at regular intervals to other masters informing that it is continuing to
assume to be the leader. In case other masters dont get this notification for some time, the
nodes initiate the process to reelect the leader among themselves.
all master ndoes have a RAFT db which stores the state of the cluster. whenever the leader has
to add a new node, it sends a notificaiton to other masters and if get back confirmation from
at least the Quorum(min required to make a decision), it commits the change to the db. This 
ensures consensus.
Quorum = (total masters / 2) + 1, use floor for decimals e.g 3.5 -> 3
Dcoker recommends 7 managers, adding more may slow down ops. but there's no hard limit
always pick odd number of masters, say if the masters are to be segmented into two groups,
at least one group will have the quorum to make a decision.
if one master is left alive, it will not be able to manage the cluster, however, the services will
continue to run. to be able to manage the cluster bring back the dead masters. if its not 
possible, run "docker swarm init --force-new-cluster" to bring back the cluster and manage as
well. run the "docker node promote" command on a worker to make it a master.
B T W: manager nodes are also worker nodes. to only dedicate a master to only perform management
ops, run command "docker node update --availability drain <Node>".

docker swarm leave // to leave the cluster
docker rm <node-name> // to remove from cluster
dockere swarm join --token manager // to get the command for joining as master

docker node ls // lists how many nodes are part of Docker swarm currently

Docker Service
----------------
docker service is one or more instances of a cluster running on the same node or across
multiple nodes in a docker swarm cluster

docker sevice create --replicas=3 my-web-server
its same as run command
its run on master to spread instances across the cluster using its load balancer

docker service create --global adhsjkasd
it creates one instance on each node

use --name to name the instances. docker swarm appends a number to each conatiner instance

docker service update --replicas=4 my-iinstance-name
updates at a later stage

docker service ls   /// lists running services (images and their replicas)
docker service ps <id> /// lists replicas of a service, shows status of workers

Docker Stacks
---------------
A stack is a group of inter-related services that put together form an entire application.

As we could convert multiple docker run commands into a single docker compose yml file,
we can do the same with docker services.

Just write the docker service commands as a docker compose yml file, same as before.
Note: docker compose file should have version '3' at least

And then run this command to create your docker swarm conatiners:
> docker stack deploy
! to update the stack later call the same command, make sure you use the same name and file used

example:
docker stack deploy voting-app-stack --compose-file docker-stack.yml

Visualization:
if you have a large cluster, it gets difficult to interpret information using the docker
service ls and ps commands. There's a visualizer available at docker hub called dockersamples/visualizer


Playground
-------------
go to labs.play-with-docker.com to develop skills related to devops and work with actual servers
go to labs.play-with-k8s.com to develop skills related to kubernetes and work with actual cluster
